An autoencoder is a specific type of deep learning model architecture that is being explored in interpretability
research as a way to identify latent factors that are embedded in the patterns across different neurons.
In this video, I will describe the architecture of the autoencoder and how it is used for interpretability.
And then I'll switch to Python and show you how interpret autoencoders are set up, how they are trained,
and a few different ways of picking components to interpret and analyze.
In the code demo.
Here in this video I will use simulated data, not real LM data activations.
That's going to help us with the evaluating the performance of the autoencoder, and will also facilitate
a critical discussion about some of the challenges of interpreting autoencoders in real data.
And in the next video, I'll show another code demo with an autoencoder in real LM data.
And the video thereafter, you will get to continue exploring autoencoders in a code challenge.
In this slide, I will give an overview of the big picture idea of using a sparse autoencoder to identify
latent constructs.
So imagine we have this representation of a noun in an la.
Now we don't actually know how llms represent the concept of a noun.
Language models are not trained to know concepts like parts of speech.
They do somehow learn it from next token prediction.
But the question is where is this concept actually stored in the LLM weights and how is it represented?
Of course, a noun is a relatively simple latent concept in the context of AI safety.
You could replace this with a concept like deception or a willingness to participate in illegal or harmful
activities.
Anyway, the concept of a noun is somehow embedded in the patterns of weights across the different transformer
blocks.
So this is a latent variable.
We cannot measure it directly.
However, we can design experiments to elicit manifest variables that we actually can measure.
For example, we can just present some tokens to the model and measure the activations in some embeddings
dimensions or some MLP neurons to the nouns in the text.
So these are our manifest variables.
Next we apply some analysis, in this case a sparse autoencoder.
The idea is that we take all of our activations from our manifest variables and see if we can figure
out some clever way of combining all of their activations, so that all the information in these manifest
variables, such that the combination of these activations using linear and nonlinear methods, leads
to a set of latent components that are estimated from the manifest variables.
And actually, this high level overview on this slide basically works for any kind of latent model,
including generalized eigendecomposition that I'll talk about in a few videos, and also like factor
analysis, non-negative matrix factorization, etc., etc. lots of analyses could be plugged into this
orange box here.
But anyway, the question is that we start from some concept that we want to understand, some latent
factor.
And what we get from our analysis is a set of components.
These are statistical combinations of the activations of the manifest variables.
Now ideally, one of these statistically reconstructed latent components actually maps onto the source
latent construct that we are interested in.
But how do we know which of these latent variables corresponds to a representation of a noun that is
really not trivial in the code demo.
In this video I will be simulating ground truth latent concepts.
So we will know for sure how to get the right answer.
But in real data it's much more challenging.
So maybe, for example, you can see which of these latent components has more activation for nouns
compared to verbs and adjectives and so on.
That's a good way to go about it, but it is one more layer of statistics that increases the amount
of uncertainty and also needs to be evaluated carefully.
My point here is not that these statistically reconstructed components cannot be linked back to the
latent construct that we're interested in.
Instead, my point is just that it can be challenging, especially with limited or noisy data.
Okay, so now let me give you a little more detail about a sparse autoencoder.
Here you see a general overview of the architecture of an autoencoder.
Each of these vertical blocks corresponds to or represents a different layer of the model.
This corresponds to the input data into the model.
So in our case, the activation of 3000 MLP neurons elicited by a particular token.
Then we have what's called the encoder layer.
This is a pretty straightforward linear layer that transforms the input data using a feed forward operation
with some non-linearity at the end.
And then in the middle, we have what is variously called the bottleneck or the latent, or the code
layer of the model.
This is where the variables get transformed in the innermost layer.
And then we go to a decoder layer where the dimensionality of the data matches the dimensionality at
the encoder layer.
In fact, autoencoder models will sometimes tie the encoder and decoder weights together so that the
decoder is literally just the transpose of the encoder.
That's not what I'm going to do in this video, but I will show you what that looks like in the next
video.
And then finally we have the output of the autoencoder.
Now this is always the same, or the size of this output is always the same as the size of the initial
input.
In fact, the entire goal of training an autoencoder is to get the output to match the input as closely
as possible.
So, for example, if there was just one linear layer in between input and output with no non-linearities,
then the model would just learn that the identity matrix is the optimal way to get the output to match
the input.
But in these autoencoder architectures, the model needs to learn to transform the data with changing
dimensionalities and also with non-linear transforms.
So it's really not trivial to learn this input output mapping.
Now, in a typical autoencoder architecture that is used in, for example, data compression and image
denoising.
The latent layer is small, by which I mean it has a lower dimensionality than the input, and then
the encoder layer that forces the model to learn a low dimensional representation, which is going to
be more efficient than the full dimensional input.
On the other hand, for sparse autoencoders, for example, the kinds we use in interpretability, we
actually do the opposite.
We expand the dimensionality of the middle layer so that it's larger than the size of the input.
Now, you might think that that would lead to an overcomplete and redundant set of representations and
transformations.
But if you impose sparsity such that a lot of these activations are forced to be zero, then what ends
up happening is you get a relatively small number of units in this latent layer to be active, and a
lot of the rest of them are zeros.
Now, it's not necessarily intuitively obvious that that would de-correlate the variables to identify
latent factors that are embedded in the patterns distributed across the manifest variables, but that
is actually what ends up happening, at least under ideal conditions of a sufficient amount of clean
data and separability in the data.
The last thing I want to mention before telling you about the Python demo is the loss function.
As I already mentioned, the goal of training this model is to get the output to match the input as
closely as possible.
So the loss function is the difference of the input and the output, and partly because we don't care
about whether the little discrepancies happen to be positive or negative.
And also because squaring a loss function makes for a really simple derivative to calculate the input
output derivative difference is squared and this is called mean squared error or MSE.
You will see that in the code in a few moments.
So here is the idea of the Python demo.
I will start by simulating two latent sources that I will mix together to create the manifest variables.
And this figure illustrates the idea of the simulations.
So up here we have the two latent sources that I created.
One is a sine wave and the other is just an alternating sequence of zeros and twos.
Here you see the histogram of the two latent variables.
Here I mix them together to simulate the manifest variables that we can actually measure.
So these would be like the activations from two different embeddings dimensions in a language model.
And here you see the histograms of those two manifest variables.
And now the goal is going to be to see if we can train an autoencoder to transform these mixed manifest
variables in such a way that the two original latent sources are separated in the autoencoder latent
layer and identified.
Now, in this case, using simulated data for this demo is a real advantage because we literally have
the ground truth right here.
So if we can get two latent variables from the autoencoder that look just like, or at least really
close to the blue dots and the green dots here, then we know that the procedure worked.
So here you see an overview of the model architecture.
I have an encoder and a decoder part.
Here in the forward method you can see that I take the input data x, push it through the encoder weights
matrix, apply a jlu non-linearity, and then push that back through the decoder weights, and that
gives me the output which I return.
I'm also going to return the latent variable activations because once the model is trained I want to
analyze these latent variables.
Now hopefully two of these latent variables will look like the original sources that I simulated here.
By the way, in this case I used a hidden dimension of 20.
So there are 20 latent factors or estimated latent factors that this model will calculate.
So this is really all there is to an autoencoder.
It's pretty simple architecture.
But we want this to be a sparse autoencoder, which means that we need an L1 penalty term.
Of course, you are now highly familiar with L1 penalties and regularization, so I'm sure that this
line of code here will look familiar to you.
I'm just taking the average of the absolute values of the latent activations and multiplying by this
variable, which here I call sparsity weight.
But that would correspond to the parameter lambda that I discussed in the logistic regression a few
videos ago.
Now, this is not exactly the same thing as a lasso regularization, because that penalty term is based
on the coefficients, whereas here this is based on the activations which are data dependent.
But it's a pretty similar idea.
We are forcing the model to have some sparsity by having lots of zero valued activations.
Okay.
And then I also included here another penalty term for the covariance across the different latent factors.
I will explain this code and the math in a bit more detail when I switch to code.
I actually ended up not using this loss term here in this demo, but I do use it in the next couple
of videos.
But basically the idea is to encourage the latent variables to be weakly or not at all correlated with
each other, to avoid having too much redundancy in the latent components estimated by the model.
So then I trained the model on the manifest variables, which are the mixed signals that I showed a
moment ago in this screenshot over here.
So here you see the two losses.
And yeah in general the total loss goes down.
And that looks quite nice.
Interestingly the L1 loss kept actually increasing for a bit before it started settling down.
By the way, note that the L1 and the MSE losses are on very different scales, and so in this graph
they have their own separate y axes.
Here you see the correlation matrix of all the latent variables that were estimated in the middle layer
the latent layer of the autoencoder.
In general there are some pretty strong correlations among the different pairs of latent variables.
You can see that a lot of the block elements are either 1 or -1.
And that means that yeah, there's a lot of redundancy in here.
And that's actually not so surprising considering that there are only two manifest variables and two
latent sources.
But here is the challenging part of doing sparse autoencoder analyses.
Which of these latent Components do we choose to interpret and analyze?
Even in the ideal case of a perfect reconstruction of the latent sources?
It means that two of these are meaningful and the rest are redundant or noise.
Well, this is where having simulated data really comes in handy.
So what I did here, what I'll show you in the code in a moment, is to correlate the latent scores
that I simulated at the beginning with the activations from the estimated latent components inside the
autoencoder.
And then I found two components that correlated basically perfectly with the simulated scores.
Those happen to be in this run component eight and component 19.
And here you see their activations.
Now please don't interpret the values on the y axis or the scaling of the y axis that's arbitrarily
scaled depending on the parameters and so on, but the overall shapes of the reconstructed sources,
it's really good.
It's really, you know, it's a close match to what I simulated.
Not exactly perfect, but quite good.
Of course, in real data we do not actually have the ground truth to compare against.
So that presents some challenges.
I will discuss that in a bit more detail in the next video when I show another demo with real LM data.
But for now, let's switch to code and have a deeper look.
Import the typical libraries that we always import.
Okay, so here I'm creating some data.
There's going to be 3000 samples.
And here is how I define the ground truth latent source for component one.
So source one that is a sine wave I just shift it up on the y axis.
So it has positive values.
And here I take the sine of a faster sine wave and also shift it up on the y axis.
Okay.
And then what I do here is develop a mixing matrix.
This is a two by two matrix.
And the idea is that I will create a data set comprising the two original latent sources the ground
truth sources and then matrix multiply them.
So I'm going to rotate them by this rotation matrix here.
And this is an impure rotation matrix.
So it will stretch and also rotate not only pure rotation.
Anyway so the idea is that once we multiply the ground truth sources by the linear mixing matrix, this
gives us our manifest variables.
So you can imagine, you know, at a very abstract level these would correspond to a language models
internal representation of a noun, what a noun means and what a verb means.
And what we have here in data are the activations of two MLP neurons to, uh, token to processing tokens
that are either nouns or verbs.
Okay.
So yeah.
So that's creating the manifest variables from simulated data.
Here I'm just visualizing visualizing them exactly as you saw.
What I would like to point out here is that the latent sources are completely uncorrelated with each
other.
So the blue dots and the green dots that corresponds to latent uh one and latent two, those are correlated
with each other.
Exactly zero.
But uh, the mixed signals, the manifest variables are strongly correlated with each other.
This is the sort of thing that happens when you have latent components that are projecting to manifest
variables, and their dynamics get mixed together.
So now the question is based on these data which we actually can measure, uh, how do we get back?
How can we, uh, somehow combine and pool and, you know, linear and non-linear ways?
How can we combine these channels, these, uh, manifest variables in a way that can reconstruct these
sources?
That's the goal of the autoencoder.
Okay.
Yeah.
So here I create the sparse autoencoder.
The encoder and the decoder are two separate sets of parameters.
Uh, and then we have the sparsity weights which by default is one.
And uh yeah we can play around with what that mean.
Or I will encourage you to play around with that impact of that parameter.
But this kind of corresponds to the lambda parameter from the L1 regularization term.
Not literally exactly, but certainly conceptually.
That's what this parameter means here.
Okay, now in this video, I'm going to train the model to have separate encoder and decoder weights.
In the next couple of videos, the models are going to get bigger, considerably bigger.
And so therefore I'm actually not going to have a separate weights matrix for the decoder, but just
tied together the encoder and the decoder.
Anyway, more on that in the next video.
Here's the forward pass.
Very simple.
The data goes to the encoder non-linearity and then the decoder.
And the only reason why I'm separating this into two lines is that I want to get the activations from
the innermost layer, which are the estimated latent components.
Okay.
So then here is the L1 penalty term as I explained in the slides.
I'm just taking the absolute value of all of the activations and averaging those together, and then
multiplying that by the same sparsity weight that I defined up here.
So basically this is going to discourage the model from having lots of activations in the different
uh estimated components for the different tokens.
And then finally I have this decorrelation loss.
So a separate loss function, as I mentioned in the slides I don't actually use this here.
I started using it, but when I was testing this code, it turned out that this was actually not really
helping that much.
But I do think it helps in, uh, in real models to help the components be decorrelated from each other
so you get less redundancy in the components.
It also helps promote sparsity and interpretability.
So how does this work.
So I take all of the data the latent activations calculate their covariance matrix.
And then I subtract diag diag of the covariance matrix from the covariance matrix, so this looks a
little confusing.
Let me just very quickly walk you through what that does.
So let's imagine let's see I've torch dot diag.
And let's say I have I think this doesn't work with a list.
Let me just try this.
Okay.
Uh this won't work with actually maybe I'll just do this with I think.
Yeah.
NumPy it does work with a list.
Okay so numpy dot diag.
Same functionality as PyTorch diag function.
So I input a list.
Or it can also be a numpy array.
And what I get out is a diagonal matrix with zeros on the off diagonal, and these numbers on the diagonal.
But what I want here is just the diagonal.
So given that I already have a dense matrix, how can I just get out the diagonal elements?
Well, to do that I can use diag again and then that is going to return just the diagonal elements.
Okay.
So that is the idea here.
Torch is identical.
You would just need to make this thing be a PyTorch tensor.
And I was just too lazy to do all that extra typing.
Okay.
Anyway, uh, let's see, where are we here?
Okay, so then I subtract off this from the covariance matrix.
And basically what this does is take the covariance matrix.
It leaves all of the off diagonal terms preserved and it obliterates it, zeros out all of the diagonal
terms which are the variances.
And then basically I just square all of those and sum that matrix.
So what this does is give me, uh, larger values when the covariance is across the different, uh,
estimated components.
The latent components inside the autoencoder model are really large, and when we use that as a penalty
term, then it encourages the model to reduce the off diagonal covariances, which means it encourages
the model to generate components that are weakly correlated with each other instead of being strongly
correlated with each other and therefore redundant.
Okay, so I realize I took a long time to explain this, but you are going to see essentially this same
model in the next two videos, including the code challenge, where you will need to be working with
a model that looks like this.
Okay, so here I'm going to create an instance of this class of this model.
We have two inputs two manifest variables.
And I'm specifying 20 hidden dimensions.
So here you see what this looks like okay.
And here I'm just pushing through a bit of junk data.
You will remember from earlier in the course when we were building models that I.
I really like the idea of pushing a little bit of noise through the data.
You don't have to worry about what the outputs mean.
You cannot interpret these.
It's literally just noise.
But, uh, this just basically checks for for bugs in the code.
Okay.
So the fact that we get some output is great.
These correspond to the final outputs of the model.
And these correspond to the internal latent activations.
So the goal of the model training is to get this to look like the input.
And once that is the case then we want to analyze these components these data here.
Okay.
So here I'm training the model 600 epochs a learning rate of 0.007.
Uh using the Adam optimizer here you can see I'm using a mean squared error loss.
And that is going to help us match the output to the input of the model.
That's the main loss function.
Yeah.
And then here earlier in the beginning of the code, I created the data to be a numpy array.
So here I'm just transforming it into a PyTorch tensor.
And why a learning rate of 0.0007 and not like 0.0004, or, you know, any other possible number?
Autoencoders can be a bit finicky.
They can be a little bit tricky and pretty sensitive to the exact parameters of the model architecture
and the the hyperparameters.
So you often need to just experiment and explore and use some intuition and play around with these parameters
a little bit.
Okay, so now we are ready to train the model.
I hope a lot of this stuff is nicely familiar to you from earlier in the course.
So we loop over 600 epochs.
And yeah we do a forward pass here and we calculate the loss.
Now you can see there are two losses actually three.
But this is commented out.
So I have the sparsity loss I have the decorrelation loss which I'm not using here.
And I have the mean squared error loss.
This is the main measure of loss.
And then I'm storing the L1 loss and the MSE loss.
If you would like you can also uncomment this.
And I guess you'd have to rename this.
I think that's just a little mistake that this is also named L1 loss.
But you can do this and you can add you know, you can also track that loss and so on.
But I'm going to leave this commented for now.
Okay.
So then the actual loss that we use to train the model is MSE plus L1.
And embedded in here is already the lambda term okay.
I'm also using three L's.
It's just a little bit of a joke to myself because you know we we use this loss function.
It's like net loss for negative log likelihood loss.
Anyway, it's probably not even that funny to me.
I should probably just edit that part out of the video because that's such a terrible joke.
Okay, let's run this code.
This runs quite fast.
You will see in the next video that when we start working with real data, these models can take a pretty
long time to run.
So in fact, 600 epochs is a really long.
It's a lot of epochs to run for a model that we want to use for teaching purposes.
Nonetheless, you can see that the losses are going down, in particular the MSE loss.
It drops two orders of magnitude, which is great.
So let's plot this and see how it looks basically the same as what I showed in the slides.
Of course it's going to look slightly different.
Run to run because yeah, there's so much randomness in here, but it is pretty consistent that the
L1 loss starts to pick up and then it decreases.
Uh, maybe.
Yeah.
It's not clear to me whether there would be any real benefit of doing more than 600 epochs.
But anyway.
Okay, so now let's have a look at the model.
So now the model is trained.
We're done with training.
So I'm going to do one more forward pass I don't really care about this.
What I care about is this the estimated latent component activations.
And here I'm just detaching them from the computational graph in PyTorch and transforming them into
numpy, just to make it easier for some of the subsequent analyses.
Okay.
So here you see those are the correlations across the latent variables.
And it actually looks like there's less correlations here than the run that I took the screenshot for
in the slides.
Now these are the variables here.
These are the numbers on the off diagonals that you would expect to be lower, so less extreme closer
to zero if you would include the decorrelation loss penalty that I commented out.
Okay, so now what I'm going to do is find which of these 20 components best matches the original ground
truth source data, right?
So that is the data that I showed here.
Remember, the idea is that we trained the autoencoder on these data.
And we want that middle layer some component in those in the middle layer to to separate out these two
sources and reconstruct them.
Okay.
So how can we find which of these 20 are the two best ones?
Now, because I have access to the ground truth, what I can do is literally just correlate them with
the latent variable and see which one is best.
So what I do here is create a new matrix where I take the estimated latent components, and then I concatenate
onto the end of that matrix the ground truth data.
And then I correlate all of them.
And then I look for the correlation in the final row which is this ground truth data.
And I correlate up to the final column.
And the reason why we don't want the final column is because that's the autocorrelation.
It's trivially going to be the best.
Okay.
So that's for component one.
And then I repeat it for component two.
And now I see that component six and component ten were the best components in the estimated model in
the middle layer.
So they correlated at not exactly one but really really close.
That's a really strong correlation.
Okay.
So then I can generate this plot here and we see what the components actually look like.
Now, in this case, the the estimated components are uncorrelated, but they don't really seem to match
onto the original source, the ground truth source, as well as what the version that I showed in the
slides.
Again, that happens.
Autoencoders are finicky.
They don't always work perfectly, and sometimes you just also get unlucky with an initial noise matrix.
But still it does look pretty good.
So you see this blue component is clearly capturing a sine wave.
So that looks really close to a component one.
And the green one is kind of matching.
Let me just scroll back up here real quick.
Uh that was here.
So the green one should be uh, there shouldn't be any variability other than zero and two or, you
know, a very small value and a very large value.
And you do see it's kind of capturing some of those dynamics, the discretization, the kind of alternating
between low values and high values.
But it's not that perfect.
So I'm just going to run the entire code from scratch.
Again, just out of curiosity, I'm not changing anything.
Okay.
This one also.
Yeah, kind of similar.
Like it's capturing some of the dynamics but not really that well.
This is just a general feature of autoencoders for source reconstruction.
Sometimes it works well, sometimes it doesn't.
There are some tricks you can apply to try to improve these models, but they are finicky.
They're difficult to get to work in a consistent and robust manner.
Autoencoders are a very cool and very powerful deep learning architecture.
They have lots of applications in machine learning and can be pretty insightful for interpretability.
The two main challenges of sparse autoencoders for interpretability are that, as you just saw, they
can be kind of tricky to work in that you have to select the parameters carefully, and you never really
know if you have the right set of parameters.
The second thing that makes these analyses tricky is figuring out which of the estimated latent components
to interpret and analyze.
Of course, when you are learning about these methods using simulated data, you have ground truth.
That's what I showed you in this video.
But in practice, you need to use autoencoders with carefully designed experiments and statistical controls.
Sparse autoencoders are certainly not a magic bullet that always works.
They're not always interpretable, but it is a great analysis method to have in your toolkit.